p8105_hw2_cs3779.md, before:

p8105\_hw2\_cs3779
================
CJ Snyder
10/3/2019

# Problem 1 - Mr. Trash Wheel

``` r
mr_trash_wheel = read_excel(
  "./Trash-Wheel-Collection-Totals-8-6-19.xlsx",
  sheet="Mr. Trash Wheel",
  range = cell_limits(ul=c(2,NA),lr=c(406,14))
  ) %>% 
  drop_na() %>% 
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  mutate (
    sports_balls = as.integer(round(sports_balls)),
    plastic_bottles = round(plastic_bottles),
    plastic_bottles = round(glass_bottles),
    homes_powered = round(homes_powered)
  )
```

## Importing Precipitation Datasets

``` r
prcp_2017 = read_excel(
  "./Trash-Wheel-Collection-Totals-8-6-19.xlsx",
  sheet="2017 Precipitation",
  range = "A2:B14",
) 
year <- 2017
prcp_2017$Year <- year

prcp_2018 = read_excel(
  "./Trash-Wheel-Collection-Totals-8-6-19.xlsx",
  sheet="2018 Precipitation",
  range = "A2:B14",
) 
year2 <- 2018
prcp_2018$Year <- year2

prcp_data = full_join(prcp_2017,prcp_2018,by=NULL)
```

    ## Joining, by = c("Month", "Total", "Year")

``` r
prcp_data$Month<-month.name
```

The Mr. Trash Wheel data set has 344 observations from 2014 to 2019.
Through these 5 years of debris clean-up, Mr. Trash Wheel has collected
over 1122.45 tons of trash. This includes 8724 of plastic bottles, 8724
of glass bottles, 451062 of grocery bags, and even 4063 of sports balls,
with the median number sports balls is over this time period being 8.

In Baltimore, from 2017 to 2018, there was a total of 103.26 rain, with
32.93 inches of rain in 2017 and 70.33 inches of rain in 2018. The
average amount of rain for 2017 and 2018 is 2.74 & 5.86,
repectively.

# Problem 2 - FiveThirtyEight Dataset

``` r
pols_month = read_csv(file = "./fivethirtyeight_datasets/pols-month.csv") %>% 
  separate(
    mon, into=c("year", "month", "day"), sep = "-",
  ) %>% 
  mutate (
    month = as.numeric(month),
    month = month.name[month],
    president = prez_gop - prez_dem,
    president = as.character(president),
    president = factor(president, c(1, -1), labels=c("gop", "dem"))
  ) %>% 
  select (-day, -prez_gop, -prez_dem)
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   mon = col_date(format = ""),
    ##   prez_gop = col_double(),
    ##   gov_gop = col_double(),
    ##   sen_gop = col_double(),
    ##   rep_gop = col_double(),
    ##   prez_dem = col_double(),
    ##   gov_dem = col_double(),
    ##   sen_dem = col_double(),
    ##   rep_dem = col_double()
    ## )

``` r
snp = read_csv(file = "./fivethirtyeight_datasets/snp.csv") %>% 
  separate(
    date, into=c("month", "day", "year"), sep = "/",
  ) %>% 
  mutate(
    month = as.numeric(month),
    month = month.name[month],
  ) %>% 
  select (year, month, close) 
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   date = col_character(),
    ##   close = col_double()
    ## )

``` r
unemployment = read_csv(file = "./fivethirtyeight_datasets/unemployment.csv") %>% 
  pivot_longer(
    Jan:Dec,
    names_to = "month",
    values_to = "unemployment"
  ) %>% 
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  mutate(
    year = as.character(816)
  )
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   Year = col_double(),
    ##   Jan = col_double(),
    ##   Feb = col_double(),
    ##   Mar = col_double(),
    ##   Apr = col_double(),
    ##   May = col_double(),
    ##   Jun = col_double(),
    ##   Jul = col_double(),
    ##   Aug = col_double(),
    ##   Sep = col_double(),
    ##   Oct = col_double(),
    ##   Nov = col_double(),
    ##   Dec = col_double()
    ## )

``` r
month.numbers <- match(unemployment$month,month.abb)
unemployment = mutate(unemployment, month = month.name[month.numbers])
```

## Joining Datasets

``` r
prob2_df = left_join(pols_month, snp, by=c("year","month"))

prob2_df = left_join(prob2_df, unemployment, by=c("year","month"))
```

The *pols\_month* dataset contained information on the number of
senators and house representatives there were for each political party
for each month of each year from 1947 until 2015. Additionally, it
provided information on the political affilition of the President at
that time.

The *snp* dataset was also broken down by month and years. However, this
information only ranged from 1950 to 2015. It contained information on
the closing values of S\&P stock index for the associated data. This
ranged from 17.05 to 2107.39

The *unemployment* dataset also ranged from 1947 to 2015, and it
provided the percentage of unemployment for any particular month of any
particular year. There were 6 months in which data was unavialable, but
the average percentage employment for the span of this time span is
5.83, with the lowest unemployment being 2.5 during May-June 1953, and
the highest unemployment being 10.8 during November-December 1982.

The fully combined dataset (prob2\_df) combines all this information on
a monthly/yearly basis. So the entire dataset ranges from 1947 to 2015
and provides information on the number of Senators and House
Representatives, as well as the associated stock index and unemployment.

# Problem 3 - Popular Baby Names, NYC

``` r
pop_baby_names = read_csv(file = "./Popular_Baby_Names.csv") %>% 
  mutate_all(.funs=toupper) %>% 
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  distinct()
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   `Year of Birth` = col_double(),
    ##   Gender = col_character(),
    ##   Ethnicity = col_character(),
    ##   `Child's First Name` = col_character(),
    ##   Count = col_double(),
    ##   Rank = col_double()
    ## )

``` r
pop_baby_names$ethnicity[pop_baby_names$ethnicity=="ASIAN AND PACI"] <- "ASIAN AND PACIFIC ISLANDER" 
pop_baby_names$ethnicity[pop_baby_names$ethnicity=="BLACK NON HISP"] <- "BLACK NON HISPANIC"
pop_baby_names$ethnicity[pop_baby_names$ethnicity=="WHITE NON HISP"] <- "WHITE NON HISPANIC"

pop_baby_names %>% 
  group_by(ethnicity) %>% 
  summarize(n=n())
```

    ## # A tibble: 4 x 2
    ##   ethnicity                      n
    ##   <chr>                      <int>
    ## 1 ASIAN AND PACIFIC ISLANDER  2140
    ## 2 BLACK NON HISPANIC          2186
    ## 3 HISPANIC                    3564
    ## 4 WHITE NON HISPANIC          4291

## Table of “Olivia” name popularity ranking over time by ethnicity

``` r
pop_baby_names %>% 
  group_by(year_of_birth) %>% 
  filter(childs_first_name == "OLIVIA") %>% 
  select(-gender, -count, -childs_first_name) %>% 
  pivot_wider(
    names_from = year_of_birth,
    values_from = rank
  )
```

    ## # A tibble: 4 x 7
    ##   ethnicity                  `2016` `2015` `2014` `2013` `2012` `2011`
    ##   <chr>                      <chr>  <chr>  <chr>  <chr>  <chr>  <chr> 
    ## 1 ASIAN AND PACIFIC ISLANDER 1      1      1      3      3      4     
    ## 2 BLACK NON HISPANIC         8      4      8      6      8      10    
    ## 3 HISPANIC                   13     16     16     22     22     18    
    ## 4 WHITE NON HISPANIC         1      1      1      1      4      2

## Scatterplot of Name Popularity Ranking Amongst Non-Hispanic Whites

``` r
male_2016_plot = pop_baby_names %>% 
  group_by(year_of_birth) %>% 
  filter(year_of_birth==2016,gender=="MALE",ethnicity=="WHITE NON HISPANIC") %>% 
  select (-gender, -ethnicity)

male_2016_plot %>% 
  ggplot(aes(x=rank, y=count)) +
    geom_point()
```

![](p8105_hw2_cs3779_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-7-1.png)<!-- -->

Commit message:

Adding table of popular male names over time

p8105_hw2_cs3779.md, after:

p8105\_hw2\_cs3779
================
CJ Snyder
10/3/2019

# Problem 1 - Mr. Trash Wheel

``` r
mr_trash_wheel = read_excel(
  "./Trash-Wheel-Collection-Totals-8-6-19.xlsx",
  sheet="Mr. Trash Wheel",
  range = cell_limits(ul=c(2,NA),lr=c(406,14))
  ) %>% 
  drop_na() %>% 
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  mutate (
    sports_balls = as.integer(round(sports_balls)),
    plastic_bottles = round(plastic_bottles),
    plastic_bottles = round(glass_bottles),
    homes_powered = round(homes_powered)
  )
```

## Importing Precipitation Datasets

``` r
prcp_2017 = read_excel(
  "./Trash-Wheel-Collection-Totals-8-6-19.xlsx",
  sheet="2017 Precipitation",
  range = "A2:B14",
) 
year <- 2017
prcp_2017$Year <- year

prcp_2018 = read_excel(
  "./Trash-Wheel-Collection-Totals-8-6-19.xlsx",
  sheet="2018 Precipitation",
  range = "A2:B14",
) 
year2 <- 2018
prcp_2018$Year <- year2

prcp_data = full_join(prcp_2017,prcp_2018,by=NULL)
```

    ## Joining, by = c("Month", "Total", "Year")

``` r
prcp_data$Month<-month.name
```

The Mr. Trash Wheel data set has 344 observations from 2014 to 2019.
Through these 5 years of debris clean-up, Mr. Trash Wheel has collected
over 1122.45 tons of trash. This includes 8724 of plastic bottles, 8724
of glass bottles, 451062 of grocery bags, and even 4063 of sports balls,
with the median number sports balls is over this time period being 8.

In Baltimore, from 2017 to 2018, there was a total of 103.26 rain, with
32.93 inches of rain in 2017 and 70.33 inches of rain in 2018. The
average amount of rain for 2017 and 2018 is 2.74 & 5.86,
repectively.

# Problem 2 - FiveThirtyEight Dataset

``` r
pols_month = read_csv(file = "./fivethirtyeight_datasets/pols-month.csv") %>% 
  separate(
    mon, into=c("year", "month", "day"), sep = "-",
  ) %>% 
  mutate (
    month = as.numeric(month),
    month = month.name[month],
    president = prez_gop - prez_dem,
    president = as.character(president),
    president = factor(president, c(1, -1), labels=c("gop", "dem"))
  ) %>% 
  select (-day, -prez_gop, -prez_dem)
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   mon = col_date(format = ""),
    ##   prez_gop = col_double(),
    ##   gov_gop = col_double(),
    ##   sen_gop = col_double(),
    ##   rep_gop = col_double(),
    ##   prez_dem = col_double(),
    ##   gov_dem = col_double(),
    ##   sen_dem = col_double(),
    ##   rep_dem = col_double()
    ## )

``` r
snp = read_csv(file = "./fivethirtyeight_datasets/snp.csv") %>% 
  separate(
    date, into=c("month", "day", "year"), sep = "/",
  ) %>% 
  mutate(
    month = as.numeric(month),
    month = month.name[month],
  ) %>% 
  select (year, month, close) 
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   date = col_character(),
    ##   close = col_double()
    ## )

``` r
unemployment = read_csv(file = "./fivethirtyeight_datasets/unemployment.csv") %>% 
  pivot_longer(
    Jan:Dec,
    names_to = "month",
    values_to = "unemployment"
  ) %>% 
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  mutate(
    year = as.character(816)
  )
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   Year = col_double(),
    ##   Jan = col_double(),
    ##   Feb = col_double(),
    ##   Mar = col_double(),
    ##   Apr = col_double(),
    ##   May = col_double(),
    ##   Jun = col_double(),
    ##   Jul = col_double(),
    ##   Aug = col_double(),
    ##   Sep = col_double(),
    ##   Oct = col_double(),
    ##   Nov = col_double(),
    ##   Dec = col_double()
    ## )

``` r
month.numbers <- match(unemployment$month,month.abb)
unemployment = mutate(unemployment, month = month.name[month.numbers])
```

## Joining Datasets

``` r
prob2_df = left_join(pols_month, snp, by=c("year","month"))

prob2_df = left_join(prob2_df, unemployment, by=c("year","month"))
```

The *pols\_month* dataset contained information on the number of
senators and house representatives there were for each political party
for each month of each year from 1947 until 2015. Additionally, it
provided information on the political affilition of the President at
that time.

The *snp* dataset was also broken down by month and years. However, this
information only ranged from 1950 to 2015. It contained information on
the closing values of S\&P stock index for the associated data. This
ranged from 17.05 to 2107.39

The *unemployment* dataset also ranged from 1947 to 2015, and it
provided the percentage of unemployment for any particular month of any
particular year. There were 6 months in which data was unavialable, but
the average percentage employment for the span of this time span is
5.83, with the lowest unemployment being 2.5 during May-June 1953, and
the highest unemployment being 10.8 during November-December 1982.

The fully combined dataset (prob2\_df) combines all this information on
a monthly/yearly basis. So the entire dataset ranges from 1947 to 2015
and provides information on the number of Senators and House
Representatives, as well as the associated stock index and unemployment.

# Problem 3 - Popular Baby Names, NYC

``` r
pop_baby_names = read_csv(file = "./Popular_Baby_Names.csv") %>% 
  mutate_all(.funs=toupper) %>% 
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  distinct()
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   `Year of Birth` = col_double(),
    ##   Gender = col_character(),
    ##   Ethnicity = col_character(),
    ##   `Child's First Name` = col_character(),
    ##   Count = col_double(),
    ##   Rank = col_double()
    ## )

``` r
pop_baby_names$ethnicity[pop_baby_names$ethnicity=="ASIAN AND PACI"] <- "ASIAN AND PACIFIC ISLANDER" 
pop_baby_names$ethnicity[pop_baby_names$ethnicity=="BLACK NON HISP"] <- "BLACK NON HISPANIC"
pop_baby_names$ethnicity[pop_baby_names$ethnicity=="WHITE NON HISP"] <- "WHITE NON HISPANIC"

pop_baby_names %>% 
  group_by(ethnicity) %>% 
  summarize(n=n())
```

    ## # A tibble: 4 x 2
    ##   ethnicity                      n
    ##   <chr>                      <int>
    ## 1 ASIAN AND PACIFIC ISLANDER  2140
    ## 2 BLACK NON HISPANIC          2186
    ## 3 HISPANIC                    3564
    ## 4 WHITE NON HISPANIC          4291

## Table of “Olivia” name popularity ranking over time by ethnicity

``` r
pop_baby_names %>% 
  group_by(year_of_birth) %>% 
  filter(childs_first_name == "OLIVIA") %>% 
  select(-gender, -count, -childs_first_name) %>% 
  pivot_wider(
    names_from = year_of_birth,
    values_from = rank
  )
```

    ## # A tibble: 4 x 7
    ##   ethnicity                  `2016` `2015` `2014` `2013` `2012` `2011`
    ##   <chr>                      <chr>  <chr>  <chr>  <chr>  <chr>  <chr> 
    ## 1 ASIAN AND PACIFIC ISLANDER 1      1      1      3      3      4     
    ## 2 BLACK NON HISPANIC         8      4      8      6      8      10    
    ## 3 HISPANIC                   13     16     16     22     22     18    
    ## 4 WHITE NON HISPANIC         1      1      1      1      4      2

## Table of Most Popular Names for Male Children

``` r
pop_baby_names %>% 
  group_by(year_of_birth) %>% 
  filter(gender=="MALE", rank==1) %>% 
  select(-count, -gender, -rank) %>% 
  pivot_wider(
    names_from = year_of_birth,
    values_from = childs_first_name
  )
```

    ## # A tibble: 4 x 7
    ##   ethnicity                  `2016` `2015` `2014` `2013` `2012` `2011` 
    ##   <chr>                      <chr>  <chr>  <chr>  <chr>  <chr>  <chr>  
    ## 1 ASIAN AND PACIFIC ISLANDER ETHAN  JAYDEN JAYDEN JAYDEN RYAN   ETHAN  
    ## 2 BLACK NON HISPANIC         NOAH   NOAH   ETHAN  ETHAN  JAYDEN JAYDEN 
    ## 3 HISPANIC                   LIAM   LIAM   LIAM   JAYDEN JAYDEN JAYDEN 
    ## 4 WHITE NON HISPANIC         JOSEPH DAVID  JOSEPH DAVID  JOSEPH MICHAEL

## Scatterplot of Name Popularity Ranking Amongst Non-Hispanic Whites

``` r
male_2016_plot = pop_baby_names %>% 
  group_by(year_of_birth) %>% 
  filter(year_of_birth==2016,gender=="MALE",ethnicity=="WHITE NON HISPANIC") %>% 
  select (-gender, -ethnicity)

male_2016_plot %>% 
  ggplot(aes(x=rank, y=count)) +
    geom_point()
```

![](p8105_hw2_cs3779_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-8-1.png)<!-- -->
